==================
 Segments and Span
==================

Definitions
===========

string
 an ordered sequence of **n** characters; the *length* of a string is equivalent to **n**:

 $$\0leqn\equivlength$$

substring
 an ordered sequence of **m** characters *contained in* or *equal to* a reference string of length **n**; may exist in more than one *location* within a string:

 ``m <= n``

proper substring
 a substring of **m** characters that is *not equal to* a reference string of length **n**:

 ``m < n``
    
segment
 a *specific* substring of **m** characters identified by its *inclusive* **start** location, a zero-based index; the sum of **start** and **m** is equivalent to the *exclusive* **stop** location:

 ``start + m ≡ stop``

 as a result of this relationship, a segment can be uniquely identified using *any two* values from **start**, **stop**, or **m**; **stop** must be less than or equal to **n**:

 ``0 <= start <= stop <= n``
 
A *segment* is frequently identified by its *inclusive* **start** and *exclusive* **stop** locations within a reference string.  Two integers can identify a valid segment for a string of length **n** if they are:

 1. ordered
 2. between zero and **n** inclusive

.. sidebar:: Segment as a vector

 A segment can be thought of as a one dimensional vector having a location at ``start``, and a length of ``stop-start``.

A segment having a non-zero **start** value, *or* a **stop** value less than **n** defines a *proper substring*.

It is possible for a segment to have identical **start** and **stop** values, in which case it defines an *empty substring* (i.e., zero length) at a *specific location*.

In Python, a ``str`` is immutable.  And because since substrings are themselves ``str`` objects, they too are immutable.  This attribute extends to segments, which because they define a substring, are also immutable.

.. admonition:: Key Concept

   Segments are immutable

Span
====

A segment can be represented in Python with a 2-tuple of ``int`` values.  Pawpaw offers a class named ``Span``\ [#]_ for this purpose. ``Span`` is derived from Python's `NamedTuple <https://docs.python.org/3/library/collections.html?highlight=namedtuple#collections.namedtuple>`_, which results in a tuple-like object that:

 - has fields accessible by attribute lookup
 - is indexable and iterable
 - requires no more memory than regular tuples
 - has immutable elements.
 
Because they are tuples, ``Span`` objects are themselves immutable.  This ensures that immutable representation for segments within Pawpaw.

Creating a ``Span`` only requires a pair of ``int`` value for ``start`` and ``stop``:

>>> Span(0, 3)
Span(start=0, stop=3)

As a named tuple, ``Span`` can be used as direct replacement for a tuple:

>>> 'The vals are %d and %d.' % Span(2, 5)
'The vals are 2 and 5'

A ``Span`` can also be unpacked using the ``*`` operator.  For example, many ``str`` methods feature
``start`` and ``end`` parameters, which can be supplied via unpacking a ``Span``:

>>> s = '3. This sentence has "3" as a prefix.'
>>> span = Span(1, len(s))
>>> s.find('3', *span)
22

Slice Coordination
==================

A ``Span`` can be easily converted to a Python ``slice`` via unpacking:

>>> s = ' leading and trailing spaces '
>>> span = Span(1, len(s) - 1)
>>> _slice = slice(*span)
>>> s[_slice]  # strip leading and trailing chars
'leading and trailing spaces'

However, a ``Span`` and ``slice`` are **not** equivalent.  A Python's ``slice`` constructor has ``start`` and ``stop`` parameters[#]_, but they are *Python-style indices*, which allow negative values.  So although a ``Span`` can always be converted to a ``slice``, the reverse is not true:
  
>>> slice(-10, 1)
slice(-10, 1, None)
>>> slice(3)
slice(None, 3, None)

To convert from ``slice`` to ``Span``, the indices must be *normalized* to valid locations within the reference string.  For example, given a ``str`` of length ``n`` and a ``slice(1, -1)``, the associated ``Span`` would be:

 ``Span(1, n - 1)``

The ``Span`` class offers a static constructor method ``.from_indices`` that performs normalization for you:

>>> s = 'abcd'
>>> Span.from_indices(s, 1, -1)
Span(start=1, stop=3)
>>> Span.from_indices(s, -1)
Span(start=3, stop=4)
>>> Span.from_indices(s, stop=-2)
Span(start=0, stop=2)

The ``.from_indices`` constructor only uses the length of the reference ``str``.  The first parameter, ``basis``, accepts an ``int`` or any ``Sized``\ [#]_ type.

----

.. [#] The choice of *Span* for this type name instead of *Segment* is based on the extensive use of *span* in the ``re`` and ``regex`` modules.

.. [#] Python's ``slice`` constructor also features a ``step`` parameter, which defaults to 1. Slicing a ``str`` with ``step`` values other than 1 does not result in a *proper substring*, i.e., the resulting ``str`` is not contained within the starting ``str``.

.. [#] Python's ``Sized`` type supports the ``len`` keyword via a ``__len__`` method, which is used to supply a length by ``.from_indices``.
