===
XML
===

Introduction
============

Pawpaw provides offers enhanced XML processing capabilities in its ``xml`` namespace.  Functionality is present in two main classes:

* ``XmlParser``
* ``XmlHelper``

XmlParser
=========

Pawpaw's ``XmlParser`` is a drop-in replacement for Python's ``ElementTree.XmlParser``.  Both return identical graphs of ``Element``
objects, however, the ``Element`` objects produced by the Pawpaw parser are decorated with an additional ``.ito`` attribute that
returns a corresponding ``Ito`` corresponding to the substring the ``Element`` was extracted from.  These ``Ito`` objects, in turn, have
their ``.value`` method overriden to return their associated ``Element`` objects.  All of the ``Ito`` objects are fully hierarchical
with one another back to the topmost (root) node of the overall XML document, and have children corresponding to tags, attributes,
and text.

Using the PawPaw parser results in two, parallel datastructures that are cross-linked to each other at every element.  This allows
you to use *either* data structure where convenient.  You can even swtich back and forth as needed.

>>> root.find('*').ito.find(f'*[d:{xml.descriptors.TEXT}]')  # Get untransformed text of element

Usage
-----

Pawpaw's ``XmlParser`` dervies from ``xml.ElementTree.XmlParser``, which by default, uses a C implementation.  However, in order to hook
certain methods, the Python implementation must be used instead.  This can be achieved by adding the following statements to you
import section before any references are made to ``xml.ElementTree``:

>>> import sys
>>> # Force Python XML parser, not faster C version so that we can hook methods
>>> sys.modules['_elementtree'] = None

.. warning::
    This is warning text. Use a warning for information the user must
    understand to avoid negative consequences.

From here, using Pawpaw's XmlParser is straightforward:

>>> import xml.etree.ElementTree as ET
>>> from pawpaw import xml
>>> 
>>> text = """<?xml version="1.0"?>
>>> <music xmlns:mb="http://musicbrainz.org/ns/mmd-1.0#" xmlns="http://mymusic.org/xml/">
>>>     <album genre="R&amp;B" mb:id="123-456-789-0">
>>>         Robson Jorge &amp; Lincoln Olivetti <!-- 1982, Vinyl -->
>>>     </album>
>>> </music>"""
>>> 
>>> root = ET.fromstring(text, parser=xml.XmlParser())

At this point root is a *normal* ``ElementTree.Element``:

>>> f'{type(root)=}'
"type(root)=<class 'xml.etree.ElementTree.Element'>"
>>> f'{root=}'
"root=<Element '{http://www.musicforall.org/xml/}music' at 0x151d9f9c820>"

And it also has an additional ``.ito`` attribute[#]_:

>>> from pawpaw.visualization import pepo
>>> print(pepo.Tree().dumps(root.ito))
XXXXXXXX
XXXXXXXX
XXXXXXXX

Note that XmlParsers are *transformational*, i.e., the resulting Element objects have text that may be altered from the original, underlying xml:
 - xmlns attriutes removed
 - Namespace keys for entity tags and attribute names replaced with full-namespace values, e.g., 'mb:id' -> '{http://musicbrainz.org/ns/mmd-1.0#}id'
 - Entity references converted to characters, e.g. '&amp;' -> '&'
 - Comments and processing instructions removed[#]_ e.g. 'Robson Jorge &amp; Lincoln Olivetti <!-- 1982, Vinyl -->' -> 'Robson Jorge &amp; Lincoln Olivetti'

Most of the time, these types of transformations are exactly what you need.  However, in some cases you may need access to the original underlying text
(or even just the offsets.)  This is where Pawpaw comes in.  For example, let's say you need to access the xml comment:

>>> child = root[0]  # First and only child
>>>
>>> child.text  # Element.text has entities converted and comments stripped
'\n        Robson Jorge & Lincoln Olivetti \n    '
>>>
>>> i = child.ito.find(f'*[d:{xml.descriptors.TEXT}]')  # Plumule query to find element's text
>>> str(i)  # Show text as it appears in actual xml
'\n        Robson Jorge &amp; Lincoln Olivetti <!-- 1982, Vinyl -->\n    '
>>>
>>> c = i.find(f'*[d:{xml.descriptors.COMMENT}]')  # Get comment
>>> f'{c:%span %substr!r}  # Display comment (show span and substr repr)
"(223, 242) '<!-- 1982 Vinyl -->'"

XmlHelper
=========

Pawpaw's ``XmlHelper`` offers a variety of useful methods for working with Element data.

* ``get_qualified_name``
* ``get_xmlns``
* ``get_prefix_map`` : Builds a prefix dict suitable for passing to ET methods such as Element.find('foo:goo', prefix_map); keys & values are suitable for passing to xml.etree.ElementTree.register_namespace``, ``.find``, or ``.findall methods``
* ``get_default_namespace``
* ``get_element_text_if_found``
* ``get_local_name``
* ``get_namespace``
* ``find_all_descendants_by_local_name``
* ``find_descendant_by_local_name``
* ``reverse_find``

----

.. [#] If this format string looks strange to you, note that as of Python 3.8, format strings support `self-documenting expressions <https://docs.python.org/3/whatsnew/3.8.html#f-strings-support-for-self-documenting-expressions-and-debugging>`_.

.. [#] As of Python 3.8, you can pass a reference to a ``TreeBuilder`` to ``ElementTree.XmlParser`` to define how you want comments and processing
instructions handled.  However, this behavior results in additional ``Element`` objects containing the comments and/or processing instructions, which
results in an awkward tree structure that has less correspondance to the underlying XML document
