# Visualization

## Introduction

Pawpaw included limited visualization tools intended to help develop, test, and debug.

## Format Strings

Pawpaw's ``Ito`` has a well defined  ``.__format__`` that makes it possible to specify a format string for
an ``Ito`` object in [formatted string literals](https://docs.python.org/3/reference/lexical_analysis.html#f-strings) and when using ``str.format()``.
Two categories of formatting directives are available: Integer and String, each with its own vocabulary and modifiers.  Both formatting directives
can occur within a single f-string expression.

### Integer Expressions

An integer expression has the following form:

```
integer expression := directive[:[[fill]align][sign][#][0][width][grouping_option][type]]
```

The *directive* field has one of the following values:

| Directive | Meaning            | Example      |
| :---:     |--------------------|--------------|
| ``'%span'`` | ``.span`` as tuple | ``'(1, 14)'`` |
| ``'%start'`` | ``.start``         | ``'1'``      |
| ``'%stop'`` | ``.stop``          | ``'14'``   |

The *fill*, *align*, *sign*, *width*, *grouping_option*, and *type* fields, along with the characters ``'#'`` and ``'0'`` have identical form and behavior as Python's [Format Specification Mini-Language](https://docs.python.org/3/library/string.html?highlight=fill%20align%20sign%20width#format-specification-mini-language). Conversely, the *precision* field and ``'z'`` character[^z_field] are not supported because all ``Ito`` integer directives yield only non-negative integers.

In the case of ``'%span'``, fields are applied to both the values and the result is returned as a Python tuple ``'(x, y)'``.

You may surround integer expressions with additional text as needed, however, if the surrounding text contains characters that could be mis-interpreted as part of the integer expression, you must insert the zero-length whitespace directive, ``'% '`` to allow the parser to distinguish such text from the attached expression.

#### Examples

```python
>>> from pawpaw import Ito
>>> i = Ito(' Hello, world! ', 1, -1, 'phrase')
>>> f'{i:%span}'  # Just .span
f'{i:%span}'  # Just .span
'(1, 14)'
>>> f'{i:%span:~^4}'  # Add some formatting
'(~1~~, ~14~)'
>>> f'{i:[%span:~^4]}'  # Surround with brackets... ok
'[(~1~~, ~14~)]'
>>> f'{i:_%span:~^4_}'  # Now surround with underscores... right underscore will be interpreted as grouping_option
'_(~1~~, ~14~)'
>>> f'{i:_%span:~^4% _}'  # Fix by adding zero-length whitespace directive
'_(~1~~, ~14~)_'
```

### String Expressions

While Pawpaw's Ito integer expressions are nearly identical to Python's, string expressions have many key differences.  A Pawpaw
string expresssion has the form:

```
string expression := directive[![lslice]conversion[rslice]][:[abbr_pos]width[abbr]]
```

### **directive**

The *directive* field indicates which ``str`` value you wish to format, and has one of the following values:

| Directive | Meaning                                                       | Example |
| :---:     |---------------------------------------------------------------|   ---   |
| ``'%string'`` | ``.string``                                                   | ``' Hello, world! '`` |
| ``'%desc'`` | ``.desc``                                                     | ``'phrase'`` |
| ``'%substr'`` | ``.__str__()``                                                | ``'Hello, world!'`` |
| ``'%value'`` | ``str(.value())``                                             | ``'Hello, world!'`` |
| ``'% '`` | zero-length whitespace;</br>used to define expression parsing | ``''`` |

#### Examples

```python
>>> from pawpaw import Ito
>>> i = Ito('ab12cd', 2, -2, 'phrase')
>>> f'{i:%desc}'  # .desc
phrase
>>> f'{i:%string}'
'ab12cd'
>>> f'{i:%substr}'
'12'
```

The zero-length whitespace directive is used as a null-separator to clarify ambiguous format expressions.

### *lslice*, *rslice*, & *conversion*

The optional *conversion* field indicates what method, if any, to pass the *directive* result to.  It has two possible values:

| Value | Meaning     | Example |
| :---: | :---------: | :--     |
| ``'a'`` | ``ascii`` | ``'\n'`` → ``"'\\n'"`` |
| ``'r'`` | ``repr``  | ``'\n'`` → ``'\n'`` |

Note that unlike Python's ``str`` format syntax, there is no ``s`` conversion value.  This is because all *directive* values
already return ``str`` values.

The *lslice* and *rslice* are optional integer values that, when present, slice the left and right of the conversion result.
The reason for this fields is based on the behavior of ``ascii()`` and ``repr()`` on a ``str``:

```python
>>> s = 'a\nb'  
>>> print(s)  # embedded newline shows in results
a
b
>>> print(ascii(s))  # embedded newline replaced with '\n', however, apostrophes are prepended & appended
'a\nb'i
>>> print(repr(s))  # similar behavior to ascii()
'a\nb'
```

Calling ``repr()`` is particularly useful if you need to normalize a str for rendering.  However, the intent of this method is
not strictly for visualization.  From the Python docs, ``repr()``:

> this function makes an attempt to return a string that would yield an object with the same value when passed to eval()

This allows code such as the following:

```python
>>> s2 = eval(repr(s))
>>> s == s2
True
```

Pawpaw's *lslice* and *rslice* allows you to remove a given number of characters from either the left and/or right of a
conversion result.  For example, to remove the added apostrophes resulting from a call to ``repr()``:

```python
>>> from pawpaw import Ito
>>> i = Ito('a\nb\c')
>>> print(f'{i%substr!1r1}')
a\nb\c
```

When included, *lslice* and *rslice* will typically have a value of 1.  However, other possible values are allowed in order to support
arbitrary slicing of the result of the ``'%value'`` *directive*, whose result may include additional characters that need removal.

### *abbr_pos*, *width*, & *abbr*

Unlike Python's format string language, the *width* field indicates the **_maximum_ width** for the output value, which is shortened
as needed.  This is particularly useful for ``Ito`` trees, whose parent nodes may have long substrings.  Specifying a maximum width
allows output to be shortened to aid visualization.

The *abbr_pos* and *abbr* fields, if present, allow an abbreviation string to be incorporated into the result, so as to visually
indicate that the output was shortened.  If *width* is longer than the length of the *abbr*, then *abbr* itself gets truncated to
the value of *width*, and is returned as the result  Note that you can't use a digit as a value for *abbr*.  If you attempt this,
it will be interpreted as part of the decimal value for *width* instead.

The *abbr_pos* field indicates both a) how the string is shortened and b) where *abbr* appears in the result The allowable values
are:

| Value | Shorten Method | Location of *abbr* | Example |
| :---: | :------------: | :----------------: | ------- |
| ``'<'`` | right trim | prefix | ``'abcdef'`` → ``'…cdef'`` |
| ``'^'`` | delete from middle | middle | ``'abcdef'`` → ``'ab…ef'`` |
| ``'>'`` | left trim | suffix *(default)* | ``'abcdef'`` → ``'abcd…'`` |

As with integer expressions, you may surround your expressions with additional text as needed, however, you will need to use the
zero-length whitespace directive, ``'% '`` to allow the parser to distinguish when such text is not part of the conjoined expression.

```python
>>> from pawpaw import Ito
>>> i = Ito(' Hello, world! ', 1, -1, 'phrase')
>>> f'{i:%substr:6…(i)}'  # entire phrase '…(i)' interpreted as abbr_suffix
'He…(i)'
>>> f'{i:%substr:6…(i)}'  # use zero-length whitespace directive to define end of prior directive
'Hello…(i)'
```

### Min-width behavior

Note that if you need the normal Python min-width behavior, simply use the str value (rather than an ito) in your format
string:

```python
>>> from pawpaw import Ito
>>> i = Ito(' Hello, world! ', 1, -1, 'phrase')
>>> f'{str(i):~^17}'  # Python format str expression: min-width
'~~Hello, world!~~'
>>> f'{i:%substr:4…}'  # Pawpaw format Ito expression: max-width
'Hel…'
```

## ``pepo``

The ``pepo``[^pepo] module featrues a variety of visualization outputs for quickly inspecting pawpaw trees...

## ``highlighter``

The ``highlighter`` module allows for quick visualization of the basis text with segments highlighted...

## ``ascii_box``

The ``ascii_box`` module support ascii box drawing charcter output...

[^z_field]: The ``'z'`` field was added in Python 3.11 and coerces negative zero floating-point values to positive zero after rounding to the format precision  See [PEP 682](https://peps.python.org/pep-0682/) for details.

[^pepo]: **pepo**: *A fleshy, several-seeded fruit that has developed from one flower having a single ovary divided into several carpels, which develops a firm or tough rind as it matures*, such as melon, mango, banana... or pawpaw!
